README.md, before:

# LIPPIA Mobile Example Project

## Purpose:
The following project has the purpose of demonstrate and let test automation developers to
to test a Mobile App using Lippia Automation Framework and Docker Android stack https://github.com/budtmo/docker-android, based on Budi Utomo Docker Android project.

## System Requirements: 
+ JDK: https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/index.html 
+ Android Studio & SDK tools: https://developer.android.com/studio
+ Maven: https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi 
+ Git client: https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/install-git 
+ Docker 18.09+: https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/docker-ce/ubuntu/  _OPTIONAL_ 
+ Docker compose 1.24+: https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/ _OPTIONAL_ 

# Getting started

- Mobile physical & emulated solution only using Maven [`Getting started - Running only with Maven`](docs/README_Maven.md)
- Mobile emulated solution using Docker [`Getting started - Running with Docker`](docs/README_Docker.md)

# Reports integrations   

We believe that the reports should express the results of our tests in the most legible, detailed and pleasant way possible, so that in this way, our clients have at their disposal a report on the operation and behavior of their product, as well as the performance of the team. 
This example offers different reporting outoputs:
- **Cucumber Reporting Pretty Console Output**: this reporter ius useful to see log execution in console output, in the IDE and in the CI/CD pipeline output. 
- **Lippia Test Manager**  a solution that combines Manual and Automation tests results in a single platform. To know more see [Lippia.io](https://lippia.io)
- **ExtentReport** a community solution for simple reports. To know more see [Extent Reports documentation](https://www.extentreports.com/docs/versions/4/java/cucumber4.html)

### Cucumber Reporting Pretty Console Output ###
By default this project uses Cucumber Reporting plugin with console output. This plugin shows results in plain console that is useful for development environments and CI-CD pipelines.

!<img src="docs/img/pretty-console-output.png" width="800px" alt="Pretty console Output"></img>


### Lippia Test Manager ###
This integration uses an adaptar that automatically ingests results of Scenarios into Lippia Test Manager. 
You just simply need to implement [*LTM-adapter-cucumber4-JVM*](https://github.com/Crowdar/LTM-adapter-cucumber4-JVM) and you can see the results in Lippia Test Manager as an Automated Run Result.

!<img src="docs/img/LTM-RunLists.png" width="800px" alt="Runs List"></img>
!<img src="docs/img/LTM-RunAutomatedResult.png" width="800px" alt="Run Automated Result sample"></img>

### Extent Reports Integration ###
Reports are generated in the folder called **target**, which will be generated once the execution of the test suite is finished.   
Note that the following structure is part of the report generated with **ExtentReport** library after running the test project using the Extent plugin. Results report can be found at *lippia-mobile-sample-project/target/reports/index.html*

!<img src="docs/img/extentReportExample.png" width="800px" alt="index.hmtl sample"></img>

## Project structure

A typical Lippia Test Automation project usually looks like this


```
    .
├── main
│       ├── java
│       │    └── com
│       │        └── crowdar
│       │               └── examples
│       │                       ├── constants
│       │                       │       └── HomeConstants.java
│       │                       │       └── LoginConstants.java
│       │                       │       └── SignUpConstants.java
│       │                       ├── services
│       │                       │       └── HomeService.java
│       │                       │       └── LoginService.java
│       │                       │       └── SignUpService.java
│       │                       │ 
│       │                       └── steps
│       │                               └── HomeSteps.java
│       │                               └── LoginSteps.java
│       │                               └── SignUpSteps.java
│       └── resources
|               ├── capabilities
|               |       └── androidCapabilities
|               |       └── browserStackCapabilities  
│               └── config.properties
│               └── cucumber.properties
└── test
    ├── java
    │       └── com
    │           └── crowdar
    │                   └── Hooks.java
    └── resources
        └── features
            └── Demos.feature
        
```

Folder's description:

|Path   |Description    |
|-------|----------------|
|main\java\\...\examples\services\\\*.java|Folder with all the **Services** matching steps with java code|
|main\java\\...\examples\steps\\\*Steps.java|Folder with all the **steps** which match with Gherkin Test Scenarios |
|main\java\\...\examples\constants\\\*.java|Folder with all the **locators** which match with services |
|test\resources\features\\\*.feature|Folder with all the **feature files** containing **Test Scenarios** and **Sample Data** |
|main\resources|Folder with all configuration needed to run Lippia |
|main\resources\capabilities\\\*json|Folder with all the capabilities availables for the driver |

In this example, *Demos* is the Apk the framework will interact with.
The **steps** are defined to execute the *Test Scenarios* defined in Gherkin language.


|File   | Description    |
|-------|----------------|
|HomeService.java   | PageObject: between each element in the aplication *HomeService* you want to interact with. You need to add one new file for each page you want to navigate in your tests. |
|HomeSteps.java   | StepObject: Code to support the behaviour of each **step** coded into the feature files for the *HomeService*. This code executes the interaction between the Framework and the web application and match the steps with the code who run interactions. |
|Demos.feature| Feature file: Definition of the **Test Scenarios** with all the **steps** written in Cucumber format|


## Services
***    

(Services) contains the business logic, we call the locators hardcoded here or, in this case,located in the constants class, and then, the action we need to do.

```
public class LoginService {

    public static void doLogin(String email, String password){
        MobileActionManager.setInput(LoginConstants.EMAIL_INPUT_LOCATOR, email);
        MobileActionManager.setInput(LoginConstants.PASSWORD_INPUT_LOCATOR, password);
        MobileActionManager.click(LoginConstants.SIGN_IN_BUTTON_LOCATOR + DriverManager.getName());
    }

    public static void isViewLoaded(){
        MobileActionManager.waitVisibility(LoginConstants.SIGN_UP_BUTTON_LOCATOR);
        Assert.assertTrue(MobileActionManager.isVisible(LoginConstants.EMAIL_INPUT_LOCATOR), LoginConstants.VIEW_NOT_DISPLAYED_MESSAGE);
    }
}

```

## Step Object   
***

In the steps files we connect the gherkin with java code, and here is the connection with the services, in these classes there should not be logic 

```
public class LoginSteps extends PageSteps {

    @Given("The app is loaded correctly")
    @Then("Login page is displayed")
    public void isLoginPageVisible() {
        LoginService.isViewLoaded();
    }

    @When("The user goes to the Sign Up page")
    public void goToSignUp() {
        MobileActionManager.click(LoginConstants.SIGN_UP_BUTTON_LOCATOR);
    }

    @When("The user logs in the application with: (.*), (.*)")
    public void doLoginProcess(String email, String password) {
        LoginService.doLogin(email, password);
    }

}
```

## Constants
***

The locators are defined in this folder which are used in services classes. 

```
public class LoginConstants {

    public static final String EMAIL_INPUT_LOCATOR = "ACCESSIBILITY_ID:emailAddressInputLogin";
    public static final String PASSWORD_INPUT_LOCATOR = "ACCESSIBILITY_ID:passwordInputLogin";
    public static final String SIGN_IN_BUTTON_LOCATOR = "ACCESSIBILITY_ID:signInButtonLogin";
    public static final String SIGN_UP_BUTTON_LOCATOR = "ACCESSIBILITY_ID:signUpButtonLogin";

    public static final String VIEW_NOT_DISPLAYED_MESSAGE = "Login page is not displayed.";
}
```


## Feature File
***

The Test Scenarios can be written using BDD metodology. This project includes Cucumber as BDD interpreter which is supported by Lippia by default. On each declared step you can insert the calls defined from service classes            

```
Feature: As a potential client i want to interact with the mobile application

  Scenario Outline: The user starts the application, registers a new user, changes the language, log out of the app and log in to the app.
    Given The app is loaded correctly
    When The user goes to the Sign Up page
    And The user registers a new user with: <username>, <email>, <password>
    Then Home page is displayed

    When The user changes the language
    And The user log out of the app
    Then Login page is displayed

    When The user logs in the application with: <email>, <password>
    Then Home page is displayed

    @Demo
    Examples:
      | username   | email                | password |
      | automation | automation@gmail.com | 123456   |
```


## Capabilities
***

The capabilities are located in a json file. This file is mandatory. The values that are inside "{{}}" are replaced with the values located in config.properties and in that file, the key must be equal to the property to replace. For example, in config.properties: deviceName=Android ; Avd property must be empty in case of using a real device.

```
{
  "deviceName": "{{deviceName}}",
  "app": "{{app}}",
  "platformName": "Android",
  "avd": "{{avd}}",
  "resetKeyboard": "true",
  "unicodeKeyboard": "true"
}
```

## Runners
***
```
├── lippia-mobile-sample-project
│   ├── docs
│   │   └── ...
│   ├── src
│   │   ├── main
│   ├── java
│   │     └── ...
│   ├── resources 
│   │     └── ...
│   ├── test
│   │     ├── resources
│   │     │ └── ...
│   │ 
│   ├── pom.xml
│   ├── testngParallel.xml
│   ├── testng.xml
│          
│  
```

The test cases are executed using **TestNG** class. This class is the main entry point for running tests in the TestNG framework. By creating their own TestNG object and invoke it on a testng.xml.

|**Attribute** | **Description** | 
|--------------|-----------------| 
|name   | The name of this suite. It is a **mandatory** attribute. |  
|verbose   | Whether TestNG should run different threads to run this suite. |  
|parallel   | Whether TestNG should run different threads to run this suite. |
|thread-count   | The number of threads to use, if parallel mode is enabled (ignored other-wise). |  
|annotations   | The type of annotations you are using in your tests. |  
|time-out   | The default timeout that will be used on all the test methods found in this test. |  

### testng.xml  

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE suite SYSTEM "http://testng.org/testng-1.0.dtd">
<suite name="BDD Test Suite" verbose="1" parallel="tests" thread-count="1" configfailurepolicy="continue">
    <test name="Login and Update Profile Test" annotations="JDK" preserve-order="true">
        <classes>
            <class name="com.crowdar.bdd.cukes.TestNGSecuencialRunner" />
        </classes>
    </test>
</suite>

```

### testngParallel.xml  

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE suite SYSTEM "http://testng.org/testng-1.0.dtd">
<suite name="BDD Test Suite" verbose="1" parallel="methods" data-provider-thread-count="4" thread-count="4" configfailurepolicy="continue">
    <test name="Test 1" annotations="JDK" preserve-order="true">
        <classes>
            <class name="com.crowdar.bdd.cukes.TestNGParallelRunner"/>
        </classes>
    </test>
</suite>
```

This file captures your entire testing and makes it easy to describe all your test suites and their parameters in one file, which you can check in your code repository or e-mail to coworkers.

### pom.xml

A Project Object Model or POM is the fundamental unit of work in Maven. It is an XML file that contains information about the project and configuration details used by Maven to build the project. It contains default values for most projects. Examples for this is the build directory, which is target; the source directory, which is **src/main/java**; the test source directory, which is **src/test/resources**; and so on. When executing a task or goal, Maven looks for the POM in the current directory. It reads the POM, gets the needed configuration information, then executes the goal.

### How to select Sequential or Parallel Runner:
 
**Sequential Runner:**  
    
- In the pom.xml file, it looks for the POM in the current directory and assign the value of **testng.xml**.  
    
- This would be as follows:
```  
        <cucumber.runner>testng.xml</cucumber.runner>
```         

**Parallel Runner:**  
    
- In the pom.xml file, it looks for the POM in the current directory and assign the value of **testngParalel.xml**  
    
- This would be as follows:  
```
        <cucumber.runner>testngParallel.xml</cucumber.runner>
```

Commit message:

Agrego documentacion necesaria para nuevo set up de appium

README.md, after:

# LIPPIA Mobile Example Project

## Purpose:
The following project has the purpose of demonstrate and let test automation developers to
to test a Mobile App using Lippia Automation Framework and Docker Android stack https://github.com/budtmo/docker-android, based on Budi Utomo Docker Android project.

## System Requirements: 
+ JDK: https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/index.html 
+ Android Studio & SDK tools: https://developer.android.com/studio
+ Maven: https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi 
+ Git client: https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/install-git 
+ Docker 18.09+: https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/docker-ce/ubuntu/  _OPTIONAL_ 
+ Docker compose 1.24+: https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/ _OPTIONAL_ 

# Getting started

- Mobile physical & emulated solution only using Maven [`Getting started - Running only with Maven`](docs/README_Maven.md)
- Mobile emulated solution using Docker [`Getting started - Running with Docker`](docs/README_Docker.md)

### Appium instalation ###
- If you have appium installed, proceed to uninstall it and then use this command in terminal **"npm i -location=global appium"**, after this step restart the pc.
- Now we will execute the following command **"appium driver install uiautomator2"**.
- Once appium is installed, it must be run with the **"appium"** command through a terminal.

### Appium inspector instalation ###
- Enter the following link: https://github.com/appium/appium-inspector/releases and download the version corresponding to your operating system and install it.
- Once installed, we will configure the inspector by verifying that it has the local IP on the **“Remote Host”** on port **“4723”** and verify that the **“Remote Path”** only contains “/”.

### Error prevention ###
- When you have an appium server up, run the following commands at the same time as the emulator is up in a console:
```
adb uninstall io.appium.uiautomator2.server
```
```
adb uninstall 	io.appium.uiautomator2.server.test
```
This is done in order to prevent problems between the uiautomato2 of previous versions of appium which causes problems when inspecting or executing tests in the new version.




# Reports integrations   

We believe that the reports should express the results of our tests in the most legible, detailed and pleasant way possible, so that in this way, our clients have at their disposal a report on the operation and behavior of their product, as well as the performance of the team. 
This example offers different reporting outoputs:
- **Cucumber Reporting Pretty Console Output**: this reporter ius useful to see log execution in console output, in the IDE and in the CI/CD pipeline output. 
- **Lippia Test Manager**  a solution that combines Manual and Automation tests results in a single platform. To know more see [Lippia.io](https://lippia.io)
- **ExtentReport** a community solution for simple reports. To know more see [Extent Reports documentation](https://www.extentreports.com/docs/versions/4/java/cucumber4.html)

### Cucumber Reporting Pretty Console Output ###
By default this project uses Cucumber Reporting plugin with console output. This plugin shows results in plain console that is useful for development environments and CI-CD pipelines.

!<img src="docs/img/pretty-console-output.png" width="800px" alt="Pretty console Output"></img>


### Lippia Test Manager ###
This integration uses an adaptar that automatically ingests results of Scenarios into Lippia Test Manager. 
You just simply need to implement [*LTM-adapter-cucumber4-JVM*](https://github.com/Crowdar/LTM-adapter-cucumber4-JVM) and you can see the results in Lippia Test Manager as an Automated Run Result.

!<img src="docs/img/LTM-RunLists.png" width="800px" alt="Runs List"></img>
!<img src="docs/img/LTM-RunAutomatedResult.png" width="800px" alt="Run Automated Result sample"></img>

### Extent Reports Integration ###
Reports are generated in the folder called **target**, which will be generated once the execution of the test suite is finished.   
Note that the following structure is part of the report generated with **ExtentReport** library after running the test project using the Extent plugin. Results report can be found at *lippia-mobile-sample-project/target/reports/index.html*

!<img src="docs/img/extentReportExample.png" width="800px" alt="index.hmtl sample"></img>

## Project structure

A typical Lippia Test Automation project usually looks like this


```
    .
├── main
│       ├── java
│       │    └── com
│       │        └── crowdar
│       │               └── examples
│       │                       ├── constants
│       │                       │       └── HomeConstants.java
│       │                       │       └── LoginConstants.java
│       │                       │       └── SignUpConstants.java
│       │                       ├── services
│       │                       │       └── HomeService.java
│       │                       │       └── LoginService.java
│       │                       │       └── SignUpService.java
│       │                       │ 
│       │                       └── steps
│       │                               └── HomeSteps.java
│       │                               └── LoginSteps.java
│       │                               └── SignUpSteps.java
│       └── resources
|               ├── capabilities
|               |       └── androidCapabilities
|               |       └── browserStackCapabilities  
│               └── config.properties
│               └── cucumber.properties
└── test
    ├── java
    │       └── com
    │           └── crowdar
    │                   └── Hooks.java
    └── resources
        └── features
            └── Demos.feature
        
```

Folder's description:

|Path   |Description    |
|-------|----------------|
|main\java\\...\examples\services\\\*.java|Folder with all the **Services** matching steps with java code|
|main\java\\...\examples\steps\\\*Steps.java|Folder with all the **steps** which match with Gherkin Test Scenarios |
|main\java\\...\examples\constants\\\*.java|Folder with all the **locators** which match with services |
|test\resources\features\\\*.feature|Folder with all the **feature files** containing **Test Scenarios** and **Sample Data** |
|main\resources|Folder with all configuration needed to run Lippia |
|main\resources\capabilities\\\*json|Folder with all the capabilities availables for the driver |

In this example, *Demos* is the Apk the framework will interact with.
The **steps** are defined to execute the *Test Scenarios* defined in Gherkin language.


|File   | Description    |
|-------|----------------|
|HomeService.java   | PageObject: between each element in the aplication *HomeService* you want to interact with. You need to add one new file for each page you want to navigate in your tests. |
|HomeSteps.java   | StepObject: Code to support the behaviour of each **step** coded into the feature files for the *HomeService*. This code executes the interaction between the Framework and the web application and match the steps with the code who run interactions. |
|Demos.feature| Feature file: Definition of the **Test Scenarios** with all the **steps** written in Cucumber format|


## Services
***    

(Services) contains the business logic, we call the locators hardcoded here or, in this case,located in the constants class, and then, the action we need to do.

```
public class LoginService {

    public static void doLogin(String email, String password){
        MobileActionManager.setInput(LoginConstants.EMAIL_INPUT_LOCATOR, email);
        MobileActionManager.setInput(LoginConstants.PASSWORD_INPUT_LOCATOR, password);
        MobileActionManager.click(LoginConstants.SIGN_IN_BUTTON_LOCATOR + DriverManager.getName());
    }

    public static void isViewLoaded(){
        MobileActionManager.waitVisibility(LoginConstants.SIGN_UP_BUTTON_LOCATOR);
        Assert.assertTrue(MobileActionManager.isVisible(LoginConstants.EMAIL_INPUT_LOCATOR), LoginConstants.VIEW_NOT_DISPLAYED_MESSAGE);
    }
}

```

## Step Object   
***

In the steps files we connect the gherkin with java code, and here is the connection with the services, in these classes there should not be logic 

```
public class LoginSteps extends PageSteps {

    @Given("The app is loaded correctly")
    @Then("Login page is displayed")
    public void isLoginPageVisible() {
        LoginService.isViewLoaded();
    }

    @When("The user goes to the Sign Up page")
    public void goToSignUp() {
        MobileActionManager.click(LoginConstants.SIGN_UP_BUTTON_LOCATOR);
    }

    @When("The user logs in the application with: (.*), (.*)")
    public void doLoginProcess(String email, String password) {
        LoginService.doLogin(email, password);
    }

}
```

## Constants
***

The locators are defined in this folder which are used in services classes. 

```
public class LoginConstants {

    public static final String EMAIL_INPUT_LOCATOR = "ACCESSIBILITY_ID:emailAddressInputLogin";
    public static final String PASSWORD_INPUT_LOCATOR = "ACCESSIBILITY_ID:passwordInputLogin";
    public static final String SIGN_IN_BUTTON_LOCATOR = "ACCESSIBILITY_ID:signInButtonLogin";
    public static final String SIGN_UP_BUTTON_LOCATOR = "ACCESSIBILITY_ID:signUpButtonLogin";

    public static final String VIEW_NOT_DISPLAYED_MESSAGE = "Login page is not displayed.";
}
```


## Feature File
***

The Test Scenarios can be written using BDD metodology. This project includes Cucumber as BDD interpreter which is supported by Lippia by default. On each declared step you can insert the calls defined from service classes            

```
Feature: As a potential client i want to interact with the mobile application

  Scenario Outline: The user starts the application, registers a new user, changes the language, log out of the app and log in to the app.
    Given The app is loaded correctly
    When The user goes to the Sign Up page
    And The user registers a new user with: <username>, <email>, <password>
    Then Home page is displayed

    When The user changes the language
    And The user log out of the app
    Then Login page is displayed

    When The user logs in the application with: <email>, <password>
    Then Home page is displayed

    @Demo
    Examples:
      | username   | email                | password |
      | automation | automation@gmail.com | 123456   |
```


## Capabilities
***

The capabilities are located in a json file. This file is mandatory. The values that are inside "{{}}" are replaced with the values located in config.properties and in that file, the key must be equal to the property to replace. For example, in config.properties: deviceName=Android ; Avd property must be empty in case of using a real device.

### Android Studio Capabilities
```
{
  "appium:deviceName": "{{deviceName}}",
  "appium:app": "{{app}}",
  "platformName": "Android",
  "appium:avd": "{{avd}}",
  "appium:resetKeyboard": "true",
  "appium:unicodeKeyboard": "true",
  "appium:automationName": "UiAutomator2"
}
```

## Runners
***
```
├── lippia-mobile-sample-project
│   ├── docs
│   │   └── ...
│   ├── src
│   │   ├── main
│   ├── java
│   │     └── ...
│   ├── resources 
│   │     └── ...
│   ├── test
│   │     ├── resources
│   │     │ └── ...
│   │ 
│   ├── pom.xml
│   ├── testngParallel.xml
│   ├── testng.xml
│          
│  
```

The test cases are executed using **TestNG** class. This class is the main entry point for running tests in the TestNG framework. By creating their own TestNG object and invoke it on a testng.xml.

|**Attribute** | **Description** | 
|--------------|-----------------| 
|name   | The name of this suite. It is a **mandatory** attribute. |  
|verbose   | Whether TestNG should run different threads to run this suite. |  
|parallel   | Whether TestNG should run different threads to run this suite. |
|thread-count   | The number of threads to use, if parallel mode is enabled (ignored other-wise). |  
|annotations   | The type of annotations you are using in your tests. |  
|time-out   | The default timeout that will be used on all the test methods found in this test. |  

### testng.xml  

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE suite SYSTEM "http://testng.org/testng-1.0.dtd">
<suite name="BDD Test Suite" verbose="1" parallel="tests" thread-count="1" configfailurepolicy="continue">
    <test name="Login and Update Profile Test" annotations="JDK" preserve-order="true">
        <classes>
            <class name="com.crowdar.bdd.cukes.TestNGSecuencialRunner" />
        </classes>
    </test>
</suite>

```

### testngParallel.xml  

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE suite SYSTEM "http://testng.org/testng-1.0.dtd">
<suite name="BDD Test Suite" verbose="1" parallel="methods" data-provider-thread-count="4" thread-count="4" configfailurepolicy="continue">
    <test name="Test 1" annotations="JDK" preserve-order="true">
        <classes>
            <class name="com.crowdar.bdd.cukes.TestNGParallelRunner"/>
        </classes>
    </test>
</suite>
```

This file captures your entire testing and makes it easy to describe all your test suites and their parameters in one file, which you can check in your code repository or e-mail to coworkers.

### pom.xml

A Project Object Model or POM is the fundamental unit of work in Maven. It is an XML file that contains information about the project and configuration details used by Maven to build the project. It contains default values for most projects. Examples for this is the build directory, which is target; the source directory, which is **src/main/java**; the test source directory, which is **src/test/resources**; and so on. When executing a task or goal, Maven looks for the POM in the current directory. It reads the POM, gets the needed configuration information, then executes the goal.

### How to select Sequential or Parallel Runner:
 
**Sequential Runner:**  
    
- In the pom.xml file, it looks for the POM in the current directory and assign the value of **testng.xml**.  
    
- This would be as follows:
```  
        <cucumber.runner>testng.xml</cucumber.runner>
```         

**Parallel Runner:**  
    
- In the pom.xml file, it looks for the POM in the current directory and assign the value of **testngParalel.xml**  
    
- This would be as follows:  
```
        <cucumber.runner>testngParallel.xml</cucumber.runner>
```
